---
title: Episode 3 - The Hoffman Process
date: "2020-01-29"
episodeLength: "17 minutes"
description: "I recently attended a weeklong wellness retreat plus digital detox in California known as The Hoffman Process. The institution that runs the program has been around for over 50 years. Since everything is still fresh in my mind I wanted to share about my personal experience, what it meant to me, how I feel different, and the impact it is having on my relationship."
---

### Relevant Links

[The Hoffman Institute](https://hoffmaninstitute.org)

### Transcript

Hey everyone, for today’s episode of the Relationship Algorithm I’m trying out something a bit new. Instead of exploring a topic and looking to give you quick and actionable steps to take to learn it for yourself I wanted to relate to everyone a recent experience I was able to have for myself. It was transformative in a great way and I think just speaking to it might be just the ticket for any of you sitting on the fence or struggling with ways to work on yourself. Hope you enjoy.

Ebenezer Scrooge doesn’t immediately come across as the most relatable protagonist. He is old, withdrawn, miserly, and altogether dislikable. But if we step back from the specific characteristics and approach his humanity more generally, you can begin to see the common traits and challenges that plague us all. A childhood rife with struggle, coming of age with poor decisions, bad advice, and mistakes, and problems that plague him throughout life leaving him full of regret. From a wider perspective, Scrooge shares the same struggle we all share. He is given a chance for redemption and through a process of introspection, remorse, he finds forgiveness and compassion. That’s great and all for a fairy tale, but there’s nothing like that for us in the real world. Or is there? Well, in fact, there is and it’s something called The Hoffman Process. I’ve just gotten back from there and I’d like to tell you all about it. Hey everyone, it’s Kit, and this is the Relationship Algorithm.

The Hoffman Process. Your own personalized, week-long, Christmas Carol complete with digital detox. Of course, the fine folks at the Hoffman Institute don’t refer to the process as such, that’s simply my way of paraphrasing what it felt like to participate.

I’ll state right here at the start that this is NOT a paid endorsement, the views and opinions are mine and mine alone. The Hoffman Institute refers to its process as “A Week Long Personal Growth Retreat - Transformation Back By Science”. I would say that’s pretty accurate. I very recently attended and as the thoughts and experience are fresh in my mind I thought I would share it here on the podcast because a lot of what I learned has a big impact on my relationship.

A brief overview and background. The Hoffman Process goes back to 1967. It’s built around the foundation that so much of our adult behavior, attitudes, habits, are in fact patterns of modeled behavior that we learned in early childhood from our families of origin. Going right back to mom and dad. Whether they were present or not. Whether we adopted the pattern (aka we now repeat it) or we rebelled against it (we do everything in our power to do the exact opposite), so much of our adult life is living reactively based on our past. The process then invokes four steps in order to bring awareness, express, forgiveness, and change to those patterns.

I attended the retreat in California, near Napa, however they have other sites as well. There were about 40 other participants, I’ll call them students. And five instructors were leading the classes.

This isn’t for everyone. It is a big commitment. And you are going to be pulled out of your comfort zone (which I’ll talk specifically more about my own struggles in a minute). But it’s not for those who are “uncertain”. There has to be a lot at stake. I needed to be VERY motivated or else it would have been too easy to mail it in and miss out.

There’s heavy digital detox elements to it, very regimented. You hand in your cell phones and other devices at the start of the week. And for good reason. Imagine therapy sessions chained back to back. A lot of what I would struggle with in therapy is get really ramped up, going deep in a session and then time would be up. I’d come back the next week and couldn’t remember my place, couldn’t get my body back into feeling the way it was feeling. That became an impediment to progress for me. This retreat was from 9am on Saturday to 3pm on Friday. Classes start first thing in the morning and go until after dinner in the evening. There was a hot tub to relax in on some evenings but my days were completely full. Every meal was catered so that was a huge plus and very delicious. Accounting for sleep it was approximately 75 hours worth of continuous therapy over 7 days. So I’m not misleading when I’m saying it’s intense.

Another important topic to mention: there is a spiritual component and I never was a spiritual guy. I didn’t do meditations, I didn’t do visualizations. And it was rough for me. I had a hard time. It challenged my commitment and my promises to “go all in”. I had one key revelation on the second day which I’ll share with you- that my outright rejection of some things, my desire to not be controlled (which was obviously in rebellion extremely controlling parents), my digging in my heels and saying “NO” to things compulsively was in and of itself a form of control. I wasn’t making a choice to say no, I was compelled to do it out of reactivity. And that was the insight for me that opened the door just enough to allow myself some agency when it came to the work and exercises they gave us.

So I’m not buying crystals or practicing alchemy-- however, the way they define spirit-- as your true self, your essence that can never be corrupted or damaged by what your parents did to you or what life has thrown at you-- was something I was able to strongly relate to. It felt powerful to believe in that and to connect with that.

The retreat itself took place on a beautiful, small campus which is owned entirely by the institute. It was very beautiful surrounded by a lot of nature including a grove of redwood trees and a short cozy hiking trail. And the sky at night was incredible. So it feels private and safe. The only people who are around are either your fellow classmates or your teachers/administrators. And they are all very understanding about what everyone is working on so it never felt like there were prying or judging eyes.

Coffee was available 24/7 which was great for me because coming from the east coast I was typically one of the early risers. We had an hour for breakfast each morning when our teachers would check in with us individually before class began before 9. There were a few different rooms and buildings we used for classes depending on the activities. And additionally there were small group breakouts, so even though these were long days full of intense activities it never felt like I was stuck in one place - something I have vivid memories of as a high school and college student.

I was away from my wife and daughters for over a week straight with no communication, which was the hardest part for me. I had my email set up with a bunch of messages queued up to send to my daughters every morning before school to let them know I was thinking about them. And while I was there I kept a journal log of the things I was doing, how I was feeling, and what I was thinking about my family. I would say that if I had not kept a journal it would have been VERY easy to lose track of what day it was. As someone who was used to semi-continuously tapping on my phone for updates from the internet, it was a drastic shift. And coming home I do find that my relationship with my devices feels different. I’m not reaching for things as compulsively, which I personally find very nice.

I don’t want to spoil too much of the details but I do want to mention two activities that felt important to me.

The first, expression. My teacher very coyly told me one morning that I was going to have a chance to do some expression work and was excited to see me really go for it. I thought to myself, sure, OK. And then they passed out some gloves, pillows and the wiffle ball bats and I started to piece the picture together. This was no joke. So again this brings me back to my self commitment. If I had not been willing and open to throw myself into it wholeheartedly, it probably would have been a bust. But I stuck with it and the results were immediate.

The other piece I wanted to mention was when they were teaching us the concept of transference. And I knew a bit of how this affected my relationship but the way they helped us workshop on it really gave me a very clear path to analyze and reflect on the ways in which transferring the patterns and behaviors I came to expect from my parents interfered in my marriage. And since I love analyzing, this was extremely helpful.

Each night before they send you to bed you can expect to have homework for the next day, generally in the form of a writing assignment. By the second or third day, my writing callus was on fire, I don’t think I had ever written so much by hand, certainly not as an adult. However, I tend to be better at expressing myself in writing than in speaking so it was a great opportunity for me to reflect, get my bearings, and figure out how I was going to keep going and learning.

They really have put a lot of thought and care into the order and the duration of each class, exercise, and activity. Just when I thought I was completely emotionally drained one day at lunch they flipped a switch and pulled out something incredibly fun. And in that, not only was I pushing myself out of my comfort zone, but I was also capable of seeing just when my intellect was doubting if I could keep going my body had another gear to shift into.

Tremendous support and energy from fellow classmates. I’ve never been a social butterfly, I’m very introverted. However, I left this retreat with 38 very close friends. It was incredibly bonding and I’m feeling the positive benefits of that. It’s uplifting and connecting. And at times when the week was challenging it helped keep me going. I’m certain that many of these will become lasting friendships.

I’ve said a lot and at the same time I’ve left out a ton. I’m sure I’ve forgotten some things but some I am omitting on purpose because the surprises they throw at you during the week are incredible to experience. If you want to dig in more you can find all the details on their website at [hoffmaninstitute.org](https://hoffmaninstitute.org). All things considered it was a tremendous experience for me, a truly unique and special opportunity, and I’m grateful to my wife and daughters for supporting me through it. I am genuinely a happier man because of it.

Should you look into doing the Hoffman Process? And how does it help with your relationship - when it’s not focused at all on marriage?

I’ll answer that second question first. I got to spend a week focusing on the one part of my relationship I can control and change-- me. I am now acutely aware of how my habits and reactions tie back to the people I learned them from, I can much more easily disassociate with those bad patterns and choose new, authentic ways of being instead. And most importantly, I’ve really begun to strengthen my emotional muscles for compassion, starting with myself, and that shows up in me being a lighter, kinder, softer husband and father to be around - and EVERYONE notices that.

As far as if you should consider it? I would probably measure it in three different ways. One, what’s at stake? Do you have something important that you could lose if you don’t change? For me it was my relationship with my daughters and my marriage. Two, it’s a lot of therapy (even though it’s not technically therapy. Have you ever done therapy before? Did you struggle going deep in session because things were cut off and you had to wait a week to go again and when you did you couldn’t quite make it back to the same place? If that’s a yes then this process will blow that out of the water. And finally, how willing or open are you to push yourself? You truly get out of it what you’re willing to put in and I could absolutely see myself in another scenario where I gave up or shut down midway and would have had a very negative experience overall. But I stuck with it because of precisely the first two motivations and I am all the better because of it.

Thanks for listening!
